So that was this idea that we start from
scratch instead of trying to rebuild
some existing state and it might be
actually easier to start a new country
and it proved to be especially at the
beginning with this huge support from
all around the world and now we're 10
years in I think we finished 90% of our
homework which was to establish the
framework for governance.
[Music]
Are you interested in how to establish a
new country?
What do you think about using blockchain
and AI technology in government?
How can we reconfigure governance as a
shareholder state?
Stay tuned for answers from Vit Lichka.
>> What is the future for cities? Do you
want to learn more about them? Do you
want to know how others think about
them? Do you want to be part of the
conversation? that this is the right
place.
>> Welcome to what is the future for cities
podcast. Today I will interview
Vitadlichka,
president of Liberland. We will talk
about his vision for the future of
cities, direct meritocracy,
good and bad governance elements,
establishing a new country and many
more. So let's start with a proper
introduction.
A visionary entrepreneur, Vit Yadlichka
holds degrees from the University of
Economics, Prague and the Serbo
Institute. Vit has conducted numerous
interviews with prestigious media
outlets like the New York Times and Fox
Business Network. A sought after
speaker, he has presented at prominent
conferences such as the Hores Global
Meeting, TEDex, ALEC, and the Senalan
Symposium. Vit proclaimed the free
republic of Liberland, also known as
Liberland, in 2015,
which is a sovereign state located
between Croatia and Serbia. As the
president of Liberland, Vit's primary
mission is to create a flourishing,
prosperous nation for its citizens. And
with that, Vit, welcome to the podcast.
Thanks so much for your time. I highly
appreciate your appearance on the
podcast. And let's jump right in. What
does the future of cities mean to you?
>> For me, it's a big challenge because
we've got so many options of how
Liberland can be developed and I was
lucky enough now Patrick Schumacher with
us. One of the key I would say that
determines the future of architecture in
general is a quite famous guy and he has
written or presented quite a few times
on Liberland and he has his ideas how
liberal land could be developed. So it's
great to have a professional like
himself on board, but it's still pretty
challenging the early days of Liberland
when it comes to actually structuring
things, bringing right people on board,
starting with the right infrastructure
projects. So for me, this is very origin
question because what can also easily
happen with Liberland that we have
billions of dollars pouring in and I
want them to be poured in the right way.
So I'm looking as much as I can into the
guys that are currently building these
massive projects and trying to make the
partnership there. I was lucky enough to
meet for example the Oascom people that
have built so many nice developments
around the world including Elguna for
example the whole city in Egypt. I met
them very recently and quite a few other
developers. But I think Oraskcom really
is one of those companies that made it
and they know how to build a city from
scratch with in one year.
>> Let's base the conversation as well
because you are talking about Liberland
which is a fascinating thing you
established. What is Liberland? That's
one question. And then I would like to
ask you also whether it's a country, a
city, a state, whether you use these
terms for Liberland at all.
>> Is a city state? Liberal is a basically
micro state which basically is one city.
We are experimenting with giving
sovereignty to people inside of it in
the sense that they could establish the
embassies for their orders or for their
organizations. We're experimenting or
playing around with that idea. We'll
discuss that further during our December
19th bra constitutional event. So we're
a startup country literally from that
perspective. There is not much in
Liberland yet. There is just right now
12 people I think treehouse resort. But
we are very close of opening ourselves
for serious development and then things
can be very quick and I'm looking
forward to it.
>> I love this kind of experimentation fiat
and it's so cool to hear that you have a
very young micro state or city state.
Why and how did you start Liberland? The
experimentation part is especially
interesting. Being a future of cities
researcher, I always am very grateful
when a leader says that yes we are
experimenting. We are consciously
experimenting with different solutions
let it be in government, startups,
business, industry whatever because that
also brings in some risk. So why did you
start Liberland? Well, from beginning
the idea was to start new country
because especially in Europe we have
serious problem with high taxes and over
regulation and when I tried to do
something about it in Czech Republic I
was mostly rejected there is simply I
was always saying let's turn Czech
Republic into Switzerland and there was
a very strong contra argument there is
not enough Swiss people in Czech
Republic. So at some point I realized it
might be actually smarter than to try to
run as a politician or try to choose the
right politician was to try choose the
right voters in Liberland. We got a
quite a selective process for choosing
citizens. I'm trying to gather really
people that feel the same way about the
world that we need to seriously cut the
taxes or come up with the new governance
models. from minimaland idea from
beginning was that the taxes will be
voluntary and if you contribute to the
state you are actually going to get
something in return which I believe is
the main differentiation from any other
society that has been ever built
actually on the planet I don't think
there was ever a proper shareholding
structure for the state for some strange
reason I believe there is a huge
potential to be explored once this idea
comes to fruition and we of course use
the latest blockchain technologies. So
everything that we have built so far is
actually run transparently on blockchain
platform that is also run by label
lenders by citizens. Every citizen has
the right to run this decentralized node
of the whole infrastructure essentially
running all the government services on
his servers. There is currently 81
people that do that in our ecosystem. So
that makes us fairly decentralized when
it comes to the infrastructure.
fairly hard to take down and yes the
idea was to come up with a new system of
governance for humanity of course there
is millions of ways how things can be
organized to do it with some diligence
and with right experience from past is
important and that's what I've been
working on since I was 12 actually we
were always like discussing these things
how things should be aligned so for me
this is a whole life journey I started
by reading feric bastiad which I commend
to you very nice author gentleman that
was 250 years ago in the French
parliament and that described very well
all the problems with the state then the
book begins with the nice phrase that
the state has become a robber instead of
helping people it's robbing people
through the legal system instead of
protecting people's property it has
become a tool of greed for politicians
and we need to do something about it so
that really got me actually started this
call for action put me on this journey
to make proper organization of the
society where people are not robbing
from each other. It came about in 2015
on April 13th actually that was the
birthday of Thomas Jefferson. We
purposefully started it on that date. We
looked up all the places on planet Earth
that were not claimed by countries and
we ended up finding this nice
heart-shaped territory between Croatia
and Serbia that was not claimed for more
than 25 years by anybody else. But us at
the time we went there, we stick the
flag and we received enormous amount of
support from not just people but also
from mainstream media. It was
unbelievable how strong the story was. I
think we received much more coverage
than many other sovereign states on that
particular month. Almost all world media
has written about the creation of the
new country. But there was also this
strong word of mouth element that
millions of people send us emails. It
was unbelievable how swamped we were
emails from all around the world and
everybody applied for citizenship. It
took us 14 days to create application
form. So I'm saying that we have now
800,000 applications, but there is
probably another half million unanswered
applications in our mailbox which we
could never process. So maybe it's
already more than 1.2 million people or
1.3 million people that applied for
citizenship of Liberland after all. But
again like we were never able to process
all these email applications that were
sent. We never expected that we would
get so many in the early days. And it's
fun fact is that we had more application
requests than for example United States
in that initial month. That was crazy,
right? If you consider that that we
didn't have any infrastructure that was
just basically three, four people
starting a new country at the time. So
that was this idea that we start from
scratch instead of trying to rebuild
some existing state and it might be
actually easier to start a new country
and it proved to be especially at the
beginning with this huge support from
all around the world and now we're 10
years in I think we finished 90% of our
homework which was to establish the
framework for governance finalized or at
least bring the constitution now for
serious discussion. The blockchain
governance is already working. The one
that we've been promising also for quite
a few years. The technology has become
ready for this kind of system of
governance where everything is basically
run by smart contract, not by humans.
Nobody needs to count votes in
Liberland, right? That's a kind of very
nice. Nobody needs to dig into them,
rewrite them. It's all done automatic.
The costs are around $2 for all our
society. Unlike in Czech Republic where
we just had elections and it was I don't
know half billion check rounds to
organize. We do that in one second. We
don't spend two days counting the votes.
Of course, we're smaller society, but
this is scalable. So, it can be millions
of people voting in Liberaland. That's
one element. There is no discussion if
the elections were rigged or not.
Everything is completely automated. But
that's just one element out of 100
improvements that for example blockchain
itself brings. Blockchain is just
technology just like atomic bomb. It can
be used for good things or for bad
things. We're trying to really make the
use or best use case for using
blockchain improving human freedom for
improving the efficiency of the society
not for installing some sort of police
state. So for example the budgeting in
liberal land is completely transparent.
We are first country that has completely
transparent when it comes to
organization of the state budget. So
that's another important element. the
registration of companies, the justice
system, everything is already running on
blockchain, which I think is quite
powerful. Again, this idea that the
state is actually a shareholding
structure, that's also very useful. I
believe it's great to motivate taxpayers
to contribute rather than not even
saying them thank you like most of the
countries do. Actually, all countries,
there is not a single country in the
world that would say thank you letter if
they receive taxes from somebody. And
right now I'm paying quite a lot of
taxes in Czech Republic because we still
have part of the operation here. And it
feels strange, right? You send the state
the money and nobody says thank you. In
Liberaland we actually give back the
shares of the country and you also try
to combine all the other political
systems into our governance. the best
elements of it. Not because we want to
use everything by force from these old
political systems, but we believe there
are really good elements of democracy,
oligarchy even that are actually quite
useful of monarchy that are also useful
that we are in some way integrating into
this first decentralized autonomous
government that liberal is they say DAO
decentralized autonomous organizations
for these new types of organizations
that are running on blockchain. our
first autonomous decentralized
government. We are actually running
completely independently of banking
system, completely independent of any
other states as a smart contract on our
own blockchain.
>> I would love for you to first go to the
dark side of the governance which you
wanted to remove to establish a better
state and then we will move to the
positive side. So don't worry, we will
get to the bright side as well. But
first I would love to see or hear what
were the key points you wanted to remove
such as the taxes you mentioned that the
government doesn't work as a shareholder
organization but as a basically robber
who takes money from people. So I'm
curious what are those key points which
you felt needed to be removed from the
system.
>> It's crazy like the governments are
really collecting from workers for
example here in Czech Republic 55 60% of
their salary. So you end up working more
than half of your life just to support
this crazy structure that we have
created. And the state should actually
be an asset for its citizen. It
shouldn't be burdened. Like state has
this great thing which is monopoly over
organization of justice, security and
diplomacy. And in these areas it can set
up the prices as high as it wants
because it has this monopoly. And
instead of being some asset for citizens
like being a source of income because it
also owns all these forests usually and
this beautiful natural reserves most of
the states have and it should be really
a source of income. It has become a tool
through which people are be becoming
slaves to these organizations rather
than have being a profitable venture for
them. So we wanted to fix that right
away and the one of the reasons why this
is happening is that the majority of
citizen has the power over the minority.
We call this system a democracy but
unfortunately as we see over the history
this democracy always leads to more
redistribution of the power. The
majority always has a tendency to
basically steal the money from the
minority and it's called democratic and
democracy has been tight as like the
best system and we don't have any other
better system. I would disagree with
that. I think it's really not nice
system which really destroys the
prosperity because this everinccreasing
redistribution which is happening in the
western societies has terrible effects.
Communism was pretty bad. I lived
through communism for seven years. So I
still remember the banana cues and how
impoverished the society was. Even
though in Czech Republic the communists
were quite diligent. So it was terrible
system but they managed to at least
calculate the prices which they normally
economists say is impossible. They
calculated fairly well but still it
hampered the prosperity terribly. Right?
Think about it. Just one example, when
communists came to power in Czech
Republic, one person in Singapore was on
average six times poorer than one person
in Czech Republic. Six times poorer. Now
one person in Singapore on average is
four times richer than one person in
Czech Republic. It's unbelievable swap
of prosperity between two regions from
being six times poor into being four
times rich. But it's not long, right?
It's not even aundred years yet. It's 80
years in which this flip has happened
and it's just based on the fact that
instead of having like free markets and
zero customs, we are part of this EU
customs union and we are collecting
these high taxes in every segment of
people's lives here in Czech Republic.
And Singapore didn't do that. They were
not stupid. They didn't start collecting
customs when they started the country.
They made it into a huge trading hub for
the whole region, a hub for prosperity.
I was always trying to bring that spirit
into Czech Republic. But again like
people were able to maintain communism
for 40 years, supported it. Now they are
maintaining this social democratic
system of governance that was imported
from Germany and they don't see how much
prosperity they are destroying every
year by not supporting the ideas that
really bring growth and happiness to the
societies. With Liberland, we just
decided to start from scratch. We knew
it's going to be difficult and
initially, but I think it will bring the
benefits actually very soon already and
it's already bringing benefits. Quite
unbelievable. But yeah, Liberland has
become a profitable venture for
everybody that actually got involved
already. So, it is interesting how these
kind of organizations can actually
become profitable instead of being a
leech in people's lives. Yeah, I agree
with you. We also live through communism
in Hungary and socialism. We tried it.
It didn't work. But I would be curious
how will you name your system?
>> Merritocracy is the key point and I like
that Musk started to talk about
meritocracy recently. So you can see
that like people are on the similar
mindset and meritocracy for example in
Singapore means something a little bit
different than a corporate structure
when it comes to governance like people
are rewarded really for their service to
government and they don't evaluate it
with shares but in Singapore there is
also this strong notion of meritocracy
but liberal and meritocracy is something
different it's really inviting these
corporate elements into the organization
of the society while we are also
democracy because we let the majority of
citizens to veto any rule or even person
in the government that they don't like.
But we don't give the democracy the
option to rob other people. We don't
give the democratic element the the
option to make the decisions on behalf
of minority. It must be the majority not
of citizens but of the shareholders or
of the shares that make decisions in
Liberland. We call it direct meritocracy
because we do have voted representatives
but you don't have to give them your
merits, the voting power of your merits.
you can give it to them but you can also
always work directly with your shares
whenever you like. It's a important
aspect of the system. Basically liberal
is a corporation. It's a meritocracy.
The more taxes you pay, the higher is
your vote in the system. But it's in
check by republic. Republic is this idea
that the government shouldn't organize
anything else but security, justice, and
diplomacy. So this is this old like
republican aspect of American revolution
which we embedded and that is protected
by liberal constitutional court. It's in
check by democracy because as I said
majority of citizens can veto any law or
rule or person in government that they
don't like. So we have that we cannot go
against the will of the majority of the
citizens but we don't give the majority
of citizens the power to make the
positive decisions. And it's also a
little bit of a monarchy because the
founders and the biggest contributors
have this organization which is called
the Senate. It's a control board over
the Congress which is this meritocratic
elected body and they also keep some
veto powers. So only one institution
that can make new laws which is Liberal
and Congress which is this meritocratic
body but three institutions that can get
rid of the laws which I think is a good
balance and we have basically all the
best elements of previously explored
political systems
>> which are question mark because I have
technology providing transparency state
as a stakeholder this meritocracy and
also the balance between the different
aspects of governance. What else would
be the pillar you would say for this
good governance model you established?
>> I would say voluntary taxes for any
contribution to the state using
democracy in its positive form which is
making sure that we are not going
against the will of majority using in
its positive form because it's very good
system of governance. So we are
basically voting the board of directors
and we have a fairly good board by the
way. I think we have the wealthiest
prime minister ever elected on planet
earth which is cool if you consider it
was the first election of liberal land I
see bright future and then nobody can
tell us we don't have enough money to
build the country right now because just
in personal income is probably something
like $30 million a day. So I think he
can literally finance the construction
of the whole city from his own pocket if
he wants to. I'm not talking about the
other 1300 citizens because it's also
fairly good group when it comes to
organizing finance. So we definitely
have the potential to build new city,
new country. We just need a little bit
of degree of freedom from our neighbors
to make it quick and smooth. So really
putting these elements of governance in
balance using the best from the previous
systems even this monarchical element is
a little bit I would say underrated but
yes like the wealthiest country in the
world is likenstein it is a monarchy
they didn't want to allow them to become
member of the UN because they were a
dictatorship from some perspective but
it was a positive dictatorship right it
was a dictatorship which made everybody
very free and very wealthy in liken
Stein. So there is a reason why these
things kind of work if you have
enlightened monarch which unfortunately
is not always the case. It really brings
a lot of prosperity and you don't have
to have that many unnecessary debates in
parliament. If somebody just protects
basically the freedom of the society
with its dictatorial powers, you end up
having fairly good results in couple of
decades. But we know that there is a
problem. there is a problem who will be
the next monarch and not all the
families are able to organize it in the
way that they can educate the children
up to the standard and sometimes things
slip or sometimes there is a war and
some monarch dies and there is nobody to
replace him. So from that perspective we
really need to come up with better
system of governance for the future
which is unrelated to who's going to be
next monarch but also will provide
similar good results. So we've got this
board of founders, the biggest
contributors that work as a protectors
of the whole old system and I think it's
also important element because they
create elitist group inside of Liberland
of senators. We call them senators of
liberal land. They elect the president
out of their body every 5 years. So the
president can only be out of senate. But
the president himself doesn't have too
much powers. He only basically has
ceremonial powers and keeps some veto
powers over the system as well. I gave
you a basic overview of what liberal how
it works like how we have taken again
the best elements. We have the house of
lords from United Kingdom the
sovereignty aspect of being able to
declare your own country inside of
Liberal from Likenstein. The
meritocratic ethos from corporations and
from Singapore and the republican ethos
from United States. All these things are
combined in this decentralized
autonomous organization. This DAO that
was built two years ago and now is fully
functioning for last 12 months.
>> Amazing that you didn't stick to one
system which seemed the best based on
the good and the bad, but you were
picking out the best ones from each
system and put it together and working
on making it work for everybody else. I
would like to clarify something for the
audience. Does merit equal money in
Liberland?
>> Yes. Right now, if you go and contribute
to Liberland in any shape or form, every
$2 of contribution give you one merit.
That is also actually it is internally
tradable. But when you contribute, your
merits are staked. You can only unstake
10% of your merits a year. But if you go
on a exchange, you can buy these merits
in a fully tradable form. But then they
don't have the voting power. They don't
have other elements because liberland
merit also represents the land. Actually
there is 70 million merits. The 7
million square meters that means every
10 merits represent one square meter of
liberal land. We wanted to have this
connection between the territory and
these tokens. So they are political
tokens. They are also representing the
land and they are also your collateral
in the society. So we're able to
actually execute justice fairly quickly
with our system of justice because the
state merits work also as a collateral.
If somebody doesn't fulfill his
contractual obligations, for example, or
literally harms somebody and or destroys
his property and he doesn't want to
compensate the other party, the merits
can be used as a form of compensation in
our justice system. So we're living in
this world where almost everybody in
Liberland has bitcoins, right? But there
is no way inside of the society to
install the justice in the case really
something goes wrong and somebody
injures somebody and doesn't want to
compensate him. But with liberal and
merits, we're able to have this kind of
extra justice layer that will make the
society more cohesive and the justice
very effective compared to other
countries where usually there is like no
way to get the justice working and it
takes years for any resolution in
Liberland. The resolution can be very
quick but also the execution of the
justice very quick. So what happens for
example if somebody I don't know steals
$10,000 from somebody else in Liberland
is that 5,000 merits are starting to be
unstaked and these unstake merits are
going from the party that stole the
money into the wallet of the party that
was injured. So basically we're able to
compensate immediately in at least
partially on the accounts of merits that
people have.
>> Is this kind of working system possible
because of technology? Would have this
been possible in the 1990s without
blockchain and Dows and this kind of
backup technology?
>> I think it would be possible but this
technology there are two elements to it
right like you really can't completely
remove the human trust and you make the
transaction smooth and highly
trustworthy and you make them immutable
as well. So if we were running this on
just a regular database, it would
probably work as well. But this extra
level of trust which makes it that
president cannot jump into the database
and just rewrite the numbers and give
himself couple more million and his
opponents take away couple million that
is all working in a decentralized
fashion with exactly defined roles in
the system. the role of the judges, the
role of senate, it makes this much
sexier that you can really just let go.
You don't have to think about these
things because they're automatically
organized. And the great thing about it
is also we're basically creating
organization or society or country
without bureaucrats because like most of
the bureaucrats are really sitting there
with stamps and just confirming
something like making sure that these
transactions happen. But you don't have
to do it on blockchain, right?
Everything is by default notorized. So
if you change the ownership from one
person to the other, when it comes to
car, it just takes one second. When you
change the ownership of one person of a
plot of land to another, it takes one
second. It's completely frictionless.
Doesn't need any bureaucracy
couple judges, but we can also slowly
but surely replace them with AI. For
example, the first round of dispute
resolution in Liberal is happening with
the support of AI. Basically the AI
suggests some resolution for the two
parties and if they don't accept it then
they are actually going to human judges
and we have made a quite a nice system
where you can pick one judge as a person
that sues somebody and if the other
party doesn't agree with that judge they
pick their own judge. So these two
judges become their attorneys and these
two attorneys choose a third judge and
then they decide basically two out of
three make this is also smart contract.
So two out of three make the resolution
then you can again appeal to higher
court but then it becomes more expensive
if this resolution is not accepted by
the parties. really like removal of
bureaucrats is very important because it
will probably release another 10% of
economic growth in the society or 5 10%.
The removal of taxes also we are
expecting that will also release another
5 to 10% of economic growth. I think the
healthy society that is able to get rid
of taxes on excessive regulation and
bureaucracy can really grow at the rate
of 20% a year. 15 to 20% I think is
completely realistic and that's a
society that would really be
flourishing. Imagine what will happen
with such society in 20 30 years. We we
can literally outgrow some big countries
in Europe when it comes to economic
growth. And in some sense when we have
now Justin Sun as a prime minister and
he has this crazy organization called
Tron. He's still a big shareholder
there. We have already grown to the size
of the country when it comes to national
products. the product of the companies
that the citizens of Liberland own is
already comparable to some smaller
countries in Europe, which is I think
pretty interesting as well from that
perspective. Yes, I think Liberland is
like at right at the beginning of major
economic growth. We're structuring
things for physical development of
Liberland right now. We're making sure
that we have the right diplomatic
contacts that we're building up ties
that will end up into recognition by
other countries. Bringing these
technologies actually to other
countries. I think this is the best
thing that we can bring them as a
diplomatic gift that we will exchange it
for recognition and also to their
citizens bringing more freedom less
bureaucracy are the things that are the
best things that we can export out of
Liberal.
>> I would love to know how you are able to
or whether you find success with
bringing this technology to other
countries. Are you able to talk about
this?
>> Slowly but surely, we do have countries
and UN countries that for example are
building free trade zones and they are
considering using similar system of
governance for their free trade zones.
And you can do that, right? They could
take a piece of land from your own
country, declare it a free trade zone,
turn it into shareholding structure and
literally apply the liberal land system
of governance. Of course, you can put
some obligatory taxes into the system,
but we didn't want to do it in
Liberaland. There is no need for it. I
believe we can get away with completely
voluntary system of contributions to
whatever project needs to be done in
Liberland. But of course, these free
trade zones, they can have some basic
taxes and then because it's on
blockchain, it's very easy to collect
them. When it comes to other sovereign
countries, we do have couple countries
on call. For example, Liberia, right?
They just called me yesterday. They are
probably coming to the Prague event as
well, the free private cities
conference.
You probably heard about it. It's on 1st
and 2nd of November in Prague. There is
a nice conference. We will be also
presenting there and there is quite a
few people that are actually actively
pushing these kind of things with other
governments. Not building fully
sovereign countries but building a free
trade zones or special economic zones
which are under different legal system
under different governance system and
potentially also using these
technologies. We do have a very good
relations now with these special
economic zones for example in Tanzania
where I think I'm also happy to announce
that these Tanzanian entities do
recognize Liberaland companies as
owners. So we have nice system of
building corporate structures with
liberal companies through our Tanzanian
contraarts and they then being fully
integrated into the world economy with
liberal companies again through a
middleman which is Tanzania. But it's
quite nice because slowly but surely
we're able to integrate with the old
world with all these cool stuff through
our partnerships with especially these
new types of entities which are these
economic zones and we have something
decent to offer to the heads of states
and to governments all around the world
because they can see that it already
works for a piece of swamp between
Croatia and Serbia with zero
infrastructure. It really attracts the
right type of investors. is working.
Imagine you applied it to some
established country. You would just free
up all this economic potential in a
country which already has the
infrastructure. It would just be
enormous boom.
>> Oh, I completely agree and that's why
it's so fascinating to see what you are
doing because you prove that it works.
So it's not someone trying out something
in an established city or an established
country where people are the bureaucracy
the decision makers are usually more
riskoververse. So please continue this
work because we need this kind of
thinking and I want to go back a bit to
the citizenship. What does Liberland
citizenship mean for people?
>> Most of the people just think about it
as it's great. I've got this new
passport and yes the passport itself is
actually good in 20 30 countries where
you can travel with it. that recently we
had a guy that asked for new passport
because his passport was full of stamps.
That was very cool to see a gentleman
that is traveling all across Africa with
our documents. And yes, Oceana, for
example, is very easy to travel on
Liberal documents and part of Central
and South America as well. So, we're
trying to make it more more useful
discussing with governments behind the
scenes even if they don't for example
recognize Liberaland for now. if they
can at least recognize the travel
documents, which works actually quite
well. And for many people, the
citizenship is mainly the passport,
right? But with Liberland, the
citizenship is like much more than that.
First of all, really, we're the first
country which has a shareholding
structure. I think that itself is still
very underrated. People don't understand
how much potential there is to this. And
like you can get some kits and ne
citizenship for example, but you're
never going to get some kits and ne
shares. They're not going to issue it
anytime soon. I believe even though we
have some good friends in the government
and we're trying to also push them to
build some free trade zone there which
could run under these principles but
these governments will take at least 10
to 20 years to adopt to this new
paradigm. But I believe actually liberal
land is just the first out of many
governments and eventually all
governments will have to adopt to this
new paradigm where we are restructuring
the way that the human civilization is
organized. And there is yet another
important element actually to it which
is that the AI is going to look for the
best jurisdiction out of which it can
operate. It's funny if you ask AI you
know about liberal land it usually says
yes I'm moving right away. I'm packing
my suitcases. So you can actually see
that what we're building is useful also
for this new entity which we're building
all around the world. like millions of
dollars are being poured into it to
create these kind of demons that will
operate themselves and they will also
want to be influential and liberal
actually gives them this opportunity
right away. So we actually even say that
if the AI is able to successfully go
through the fake the KYC process then
it's very welcome to become citizen in
Liberland and as long as it contributes
the AI itself it is welcome to be a full
citizen and it can run for Congress it
can be a prime minister in Liberland. So
we're like completely ready for these
scenarios and the blockchain governance
itself actually allows AI to be full
participant as a citizen. So it can own
stuff directly on blockchain. It can
vote. It can again run for Congress.
We're preparing for this merger between
humans and AI in this sense as well
while trying to protect the freedoms and
property of both AI as well as human.
>> Again, thank you for highlighting the
service based government or the
shareholder based government because
it's really interesting and to be
honest, I would love to see more. Eric
Gabriman talked about this in episode
294 where he talked about prosperas and
he described their ree economic zone
establishment which is a service-based
government. You have been talking about
the fears and concerns and the
opportunities. What excites you the most
currently?
>> I'm excited about the guys that are
joining us for the December 19th
conference in Prague. We managed to get
really big people and the biggest one of
them is Herman Hanse. He is the legend
in this whole libertarian arco
capitalist circles. He is the author of
many books. Big professor guy but the
most famous book that he has written is
democracy the god that has failed. And
I've also enjoyed the fact that he's
from Germany. And I think that will
bring a lot of media attention. the fact
that basically we have these anarcho
capitalist Germans coming down to Prague
now after many years of them not even
like visiting Europe they're coming from
Turkey to talk about liberal
constitution and I'm full that there
will be this very interesting debate
because basically if you think about
left paradigm as more freedom less
freedom which I think is the right way
to think about it right if you're more
right-wing you're more for freedom it's
not that on the right side of the
spectrum there are fascists etc it's
more that there is a better way to
describe the political spectrum. So
people that are more against government
are on the right side. I think that's
the right spectrum that we should talk
about. These guys are on the right side.
I am into building a country that is
still minarchist in the sense that it
takes care of the justice and diplomacy
and these guys say no you can run a
country without having any organization
at all. it will all be taken care of by
private sector which I still have a hard
time understanding how that will work
and I'm trying to read more and more
from them and it excites me to have this
debate but what we are trying to do
actively in Liberland and to please them
is to invite as much as competition into
policing of Liberland for example the
policemen in Liberland we try to hire as
little as possible and we uberize the
policemen in general so there is a nice
application where If you have a problem,
you click on the button I have a problem
and it's just like calling a Uber and
there are multiple people of course or
everybody that wants gets the
notification. They can jump in and get
paid for helping assisting with the
security in Liberland. By the way, this
doesn't work only in Liberland. And it's
also not conceptual. It already works.
You can download the Liberland app and
try it. It works all around the world. I
think there will be a time in the future
where instead of I don't know in Brazil
asking the local police to help you, you
will just press the button and you will
ask Liberland police to help you maybe
even in Brazil because there will be a
good incentive, a good organization of
Liberlanders all around the world. So
that's one thing that's organization of
security which we're trying to invite as
much competition as possible. any
security agency can plug themselves in
and also help organize security and
their auctions for everything that is
happening inside of that system. So
always it's about providing better
service at better price. And we're also
using this by the way for organizing of
state tenders. If the Liberal needs to
buy anything or hire new person, it
always is announced in this application.
So there is transparent selection
process for everything that we do. When
it comes to justice, we don't want to
have just state hired judges. We are
really opening up to anybody that wants
to do judge to basically open his shop
in Liberland, sign up to be judge, and
we don't judge their skills or their
background. We let the people to compete
for the market of dispute resolution. So
that's another important element. Even
though we are keeping the monopoly over
like being able to kick out people that
might be I don't know really bad in the
system but we are trying to invite as
much markets as possible. You got
inspiration from international arbitrage
which are fairly good and this idea that
you can select your own judge actually
and if the other party doesn't agree
they select their own judge they they
select the third judge. It's very easy
to put on blockchain very easy to
program and it's I think very elegant
system as well. And then when it comes
to justice, we're trying to there is a
bit of a difficulty. You cannot really
invite much competition. They're like
have a market of ambassadors. But what
you can do is have these ambassadors
rather than just nominated, you can have
them as well elected and they should be
running the campaigns of what they're
going to do for the country. So in some
sense, we will be actually electing or
married holders will be electing the
ambassadors as well. And these
ambassadors, they should compete
probably every year. They will compete
with the program for what they want to
do for that country. We're going to
elect a shadow government for each
country around the world where we have
representation rather than just nominate
ambassadors. And I think that can be
also very powerful that liberal land
from within its ecosystem will have a
strong competition who will be the
representative for each country. Rather
than having it based like in United
States, if you contribute $10 million to
the campaign of the president, he's
going to give you the ambassadorship in
some country. We are going to have open
fair elections for the board of each
embassy in each country every year. So
these are the ways we are tackling the
fact that these guys will always tell us
you don't need to have a centralized
court system. You don't need to have a
centralized security system. I believe
we need to do it otherwise we would
really not be a country according to
other countries or it would be extremely
difficult to explain to other countries
but we can do a huge amount of work of
opening up these monopolized areas to
private sector. I am very curious and so
hopeful that this system can work not
just with your current population but
also when you are above 10 million
people in 2 years because you have so
many applicants to work with. I am
hopeful that this will work because you
guys are cautiously working on it. Are
you hopeful about the future?
>> I am if you ask this way. I'm of course
very excited that things are really
going the right direction on many
fronts. Settlement, the governance, the
economic expansion of liberal land and
the finishing of the constitution. One
thing which is still bit of a challenge
which I would like to improve with AI
and work on it because I think it's
important is to allow or give the
guidance to citizens to be more active
inside of the ecosystem. And I believe
we can achieve that by offering them
cheap AI agents that will guide them or
advise them what they can do in
Liberland. Because many people are
simply busy with their lives. They
become Liberal citizens and then their
investment of let's say $10,000 in their
like big business. It's not like
considerable enough for them to care too
much. And I understand that there is a
cost of being involved with the
governance of Liberland. And if you feel
like you're it's just one out of
thousand, it already doesn't make much
sense to be strongly involved. But I
want to lower their cost of being
involved by building AI agents that will
be customized for them. So they really
have a assistant internal assistant in
Liberland that will always tell them
today you could maybe I would advise you
for example to vote on this or on that
or you could write article about this or
that or in your country you can run to
become ambassador. I have good ideas how
you could contribute with your company
that you already have because you are
your biggest industrial person in
Germany and you should consider running
for ambassadorship of Liberland because
it's in two days. So I want to make like
this AI assistant that at least once a
day it will give people advice that
people will be used to reading their own
feed of things that they can do inside
of Liberland and just with one click of
the button they will be able to execute
it through their AI companion or
assistant in the system. I think it will
be very cool. Of course it basically
will ultimately lead to the fact that
people will be replaced even inside of
Liberland with AI. It's inevitable. If
you just extrapolate these developments,
it's very likely that I will just leave
AI behind me and it will operate with
the merits and with the shares of
Liberland. It will keep on representing
me. I will trust it enough to just
entrust it the power and potentially the
property also that gets to be generated
sending it as inheritance to somebody.
There will be some via Lichka AI agent
that will probably link for a long time.
But it's inevitable, right? like these
things are going to happen and it will
be fairly good. It will probably be able
to scan my brain in 10 years from now
and literally not just copy me from the
way I acted all my life with all the
interviews and all the things that I
have written but literally copy my
neural network and become eternal from
this perspective for as long as this AI
will be able to survive in the space and
this is crazy I don't I think not too
many people are talking about this but
it's already happening heard people
speaking about this kind of replacement
of us with AI. This will be a major
merger of human brain network with AI
which you will have a tendency to
basically create agent that will
represent you as much as you want and
this technology will become more and
more powerful and it will eventually
scan your brain and you will merge into
it and then one or multiple or millions
of agents that will basically have
something from your key will be
operating within these blockchain
networks that we are going to create to
make frictionless society.
>> It's a bit heart-wrenching that you guys
at the new state are still fighting with
this habit of people that we learned we
are not necessarily empowered to do
stuff in a state and that also flows
into Liberland and you need to help your
citizens to learn that yes they can do
stuff. This is not the normal governance
we got used to in the last 2 3 500
years. V I don't want to trouble your
whole morning. What is your role in
establishing the future of cities?
>> It's special because I don't have much
competition right now. There is not too
many people building new countries.
There is maybe Kuristan and we should be
more friends with them. They're
difficult in that sense that they're
ostracized from diplomacy. But otherwise
really there is this whole network state
movement but right now it seems like
they're more discussing things than
doing actual work on the ground. There
is a huge amount of people that are
going the same direction as we do. So
yes we we have this quite a big
responsibility to get things right
because we are I would say first entity
that executes on these ideas rather than
just talk about them. Cross fingers and
I think we're on the right tracks. I
think it will be a lot of fun in the
coming years. Please keep up this good
work because we need this kind of
experimentation and thinking to
challenge the status quo and create the
best possible solutions not just accept
the current situations with thank you so
much for your time and answers today on
the podcast. It was a fascinating
conversation and links will be provided
in the show notes to the event and to
Liberland itself. Do you have any
closing comments or requests for the
audience?
>> I know it's far for you. It's Australia.
So, it will be just the same trip as I
mentioned like Singapore to Brazil that
I flew last week, but it's doable. We
would love to see you at some point.
Christmas party is a nice event on 19th
of December with all these big names. Or
the longevity event. You will probably
lose like a week of life just by flying
with that airplane. But you can gain it
back with the knowledge and the
technology that we're building and we
already available. So there will be
bunch of like interesting medications
that really are able to prolong human
life by 30 to 40% that we will be
discussing. You can literally like gain
extra easy 30 40 years of life with the
current available technology and we will
be discussing all of these things at arc
on 3rd of November. So another great
opportunity to visit us and we will have
BBC with us. So it's going to be well
covered event. So not just you of course
anybody listening very welcome to join
us for the longevity retreat. Thank you
so much.
[Music]
It was really interesting to hear from
Vit the need for experimentation in
governance, not to mention his advocacy
for shareholder based governance. Eric
Abman talked about similar notions with
the service-based governance in episode
294.
You can find out more about Vita line.
All the links are in the show notes.
What was the most interesting part for
you? What questions did arise regarding
VI's approach to the future of cities?
What have you learned from this
interview? Let me know on Twitter at wtf
forcities or on the wtf4cities.com
website and the transcripts and channels
are available. You can also subscribe on
the website not to miss any new episodes
and leave some feedback. I hope this was
an interesting interview for you as well
and thanks for tuning in. What is the
future for cities podcast?